Vocabulary

go g-cloisfeá, that you might hear, 2nd form, for cluinfeá
from cluinim, I hear; in fine, cluinsin and cloisim.

cara, for caradais, gen. of car, amity.

coimirce, gen of coimirc, quarter.

go d-tiubhradh, 2nd form of tabharfadh, condit. of tabhairt, to give.

le n-shaoghal, for his life.

chongbháil, now always pronounced coingeál.

freisin, also, besides.

na n-dúl, of the elements.

claidhmhe, 2nd for for cloidheamh, a sword, is m. and f.

n-a cheann sin, literally, on its head that, i.e., over
and above.

a casadh riamh orm, that I have ever met; literally,
that was turned on me. Instead of orm, liom may also
be used. Both are used in Connaught, but only orm in
Munster in this phrase.

feuchuid dham, hand me.

fuirthi, for uirri or uirre, on her, For is an older form
of ar. Fuirthi refers to the sword, which is often made feminine
in the west, though grammmarians give it as masculine.

do chrádh, &c. You evil fate, that you said so!

tarruingnt for tarruing, to draw. ag t. buille, making a stroke.

friothbhuille culláimhe, a back-handed return stroke.

níor mhór duit, it is a good job for you.

fear fáil, any men in Ireland, literally, men cf.
destiny Feara is an old plural of fear for fir and
fáil is the genitive, as found in lia Fáil, Inis Fáil, &cl.

bain anuas, cut down, cut off.

culaidh gaisge, coat of armour, warrior's equipment.

chur i d-taisge, to put away in a safe place.

a bhaile, home.

imnidhe, anxiety.

air fhad agus a bhí sé, for the length of time he was.

do choinnaic, he saw. Connairc is never used in the spoken language.

th'réis for tar éis, after.

fanamhaint, to wait; another form is fannacht.

cia mar, how, for cionnos or cia an chaoi.

buacach, jolly.

béile, a meal, a dinner.

fhad agus, whilst.

prainn, a dinner; also proinn.

fad-fhuireacht, much delay.

toachachd, fatigue

scarthanaigh, the dawn, the separation of the day from
the night, from scar, to separate.

duaidh sé, an irreg. past tense of ith, to eat.

nuair do bhí sin thairis, when it was over.

tuanán, a mound, hillock.

go ceann tamaill, for a short time; literally to head of a
space of time.

tapaidh, quick.

bainte, pulled. Buain is used for reaping corn; bain
for pulling fruit.

trasna, across(the boundary wall).

cuici, sí, &c. These words are applied to the goat,
although gabhar is masculine, just as one would say
is deas an cailín í, although cailín is masculine.

do crádh, &c. Bad luck to you! that you may not get any.

mar sin fhéin, pronounced mar sin héin, all the same,
for all that.

meisge fíon, the exhiliration of wine and the satiety of
old mead.  The same expression occurs in many old 
Irish tales, as in that of Diarmuid and Gráinne.

b'amhlaidh, it was thus.

dubhchan, to darken.

toirtheachar, monster, for toirt, a bulk, strengthe.

colg, a sword

dhíongfadh, form for dhéanfadh.

dha réir, in proportion, accordingly.  The repetition in
the latter part is necessary to reproduce the manner
of the original.
















